Improve documentation for virtual functions (#551)
kokkos/kokkos-core-wiki: docs/source/ProgrammingGuide/Kokkos-and-Virtual-Functions.md

# 14. Kokkos and Virtual Functions

```{warning}
Using virtual functions in parallel regions is not a good idea in general. It often degrades performance, requires specific code for a correct execution on GPU, and is not portable on every backend. We recommend to use a different approach whenever possible.
```

Due to oddities of GPU programming, the use of virtual functions in Kokkos parallel regions can be complicated. This document describes the problems you're likely to face, where they come from, and how to work around them.

Please note that virtual functions can be executed on device for the following backends:

- Cuda; and
- HIP (with a limitation, as explained at the end).

> Especially, SYCL 2020 [cannot handle virtual functions](https://github.com/AlexeySachkov/llvm/blob/private/asachkov/virtual-functions-extension-spec/sycl/doc/design/VirtualFunctions.md?rgh-link-date=2024-07-16T15%3A15%3A11Z).

Author: Better, indeed.

## The Problem

> In GPU programming, you might have run into the bug of calling a host function from the device. A similar thing can happen for subtle reasons in code using virtual functions. Consider the following serial code to accelerate

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In GPU programming, you might have run into the bug of calling a host function from the device. A similar thing can happen for subtle reasons in code using virtual functions. Consider the following serial code
```

```c++
class Base {
  public:
  void Foo() {}

  virtual void Bar() {}
};

class Derived : public Base {
  public:
  void Bar() override {}
};

int main(int argc, char *argv[])
  // create
  Base* instance = new Derived();

  // use
  for (int i = 0; i < 10; i++) {
    instance->Bar();
  }

  // cleanup
  delete instance;
}
```

This code is more complex to port on GPU than it looks like.

> Using a straightforward approach, we would replace the `for` loop with `parallel_for` and copy `instance` on the GPU memory (not disclosing how for now).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Using a straightforward approach, we would annotate functions with `KOKKOS_FUNCTION`, replace the `for` loop with `parallel_for` and copy `instance` on the GPU memory (not disclosing how for now).
```

> Using a straightforward approach, we would accelerate the `for` loop with `parallel_for` and copy `instance` on the GPU memory (not disclosing how for now).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using a straightforward approach, we would replace the `for` loop with `parallel_for` and copy `instance` on the GPU memory (not disclosing how for now).
```

![VTableDevice](./figures/VirtualFunctions-VTablesHostDevice.png)

Since we construct the class instance on the host, its Vpointer points to the host Vtable.

![VPointerToHost](./figures/VirtualFunctions-VPointerToHost.png)

We faithfully copied all of the members of the class on the GPU memory, including the Vpointer happily pointing at host functions, which we then call on the device.

## Make it work

The problem here is that we are constructing the instance on the Host.
If we were constructing it on the Device, we'd get the correct Vpointer, and thus the correct functions.
Note that this would allow to call virtual functions on the device only, not on the host anymore.

To that aim, we first allocate memory on the device, then construct on the device using a technique called *placement new*

```cpp
#include <Kokkos_Core.hpp>

class Base {
  public:
  void Foo() {}

  KOKKOS_FUNCTION
  virtual void Bar() {}
};

class Derived : public Base {
  public:
  KOKKOS_FUNCTION
  void Bar() override {}
};

int main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
  Kokkos::ScopeGuard kokkos(argc, argv);

  // create

>   auto deviceInstanceMemory = Kokkos::kokkos_malloc(sizeof(Derived)); // allocate memory on device

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  void* deviceInstanceMemory = Kokkos::kokkos_malloc(sizeof(Derived)); // allocate memory on device
```

Author: I was wondering if it was better to keep it `auto`, because `void*` is kind of a joker type.

Reviewer 2: Well it is the return type of `kokkos_malloc`

Author: Ok, fair.

  Kokkos::parallel_for("initialize", 1, KOKKOS_LAMBDA (const int i) {
    new (static_cast<Derived*>(deviceInstanceMemory)) Derived(); // initialize on device
  });

>   Kokkos::fence("wait for initialize");

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

There should need to fence here right ?

Author: Are you sure we don't need it?

Reviewer 2: As long as you are not manipulating different execution spaces you are fine. Given your code, they execute in order in the default execution space.

  Base* deviceInstance = static_cast<Derived*>(deviceInstanceMemory); // declare on this memory

  // use
  Kokkos::parallel_for("myKernel", 10, KOKKOS_LAMBDA (const int i) {
      deviceInstance->Bar();
  });

>   Kokkos::fence();

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

  // cleanup
  Kokkos::parallel_for("destroy", 1, KOKKOS_LAMBDA (const int i) {
    deviceInstance->~Base(); // destroy on device
  });

>   Kokkos::fence("wait for destroy");

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Author: Are you sure for this one?

Reviewer 3: For this one, the `kokkos_free()` documentation is unclear. Perhaps it should be added to another PR whether it requires fencing or not: it is a host function that affects device memory. It looks like Kokkos has some internal fences for that, but Cuda API does not.

  Kokkos::kokkos_free(deviceInstanceMemory); // free
}
```

We first use the `KOKKOS_FUNCTION` macro to make the methods callable from a kernel.
When creating the instance, note that we introduce a distinction between the *memory* that the it uses, and the actual instantiated *object*.

> The construct is done on the device, withing a single-iteration `parallel_for`, using placement new.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The construct is done on the device, within a single-iteration `parallel_for`, using placement new.
```

> Since the kernel does not have a return type, we use a static cast to associate the object to the memory allocation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since the kernel does not have a return type, we use a static cast to associate the object with the memory allocation.
```

> 
> Like with other uses of `new`, we need to later free the memory.
> The destruct is done on the device, again with a single-iteration `parallel_for`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

The destructor must explicitly be called from the device, again with a single-iteration `parallel_for`. Then the memory allocation can be release with `kokkos_free`.
```

This code is extremely ugly, but leads to functional virtual function calls on the device. The Vpointer now points to the device Vtable.
Remember that those virtual functions cannot be called on the host anymore!

![VPointerToDevice](./figures/VirtualFunctions-VPointerToDevice.png)

For a full working example, see [the example in the repo](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/blob/master/example/virtual_functions/main.cpp).

## What if I need a setter that works with host values?

The first problem people run into with this is that they want to initialize some fields based on host data, with a setter which is *not* a virtual function.

> Calling this setter on the device would crash if the host data is not easily copyable on the device (e.g. for a small array).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Calling this setter on the device would crash if the host data is not easily copyable on the device.
```

I don't understand the difficulty with small arrays ?

Author: This is a remaining of the last iteration. You could do, as the text says:

```cpp
Kokkos::parallel_for("myLoop", 1, KOKKOS_LAMBDA (const int i) {
  deviceInstance.setAField(hostValue);
});

But if `hostValue` is not a scalar type (like the pointer of an array), the code will crash.

Reviewer 2: I see, I don't feel that mentioning "small array" helps in the end

Reviewer 4: there could be multiple things wrong here. 

- The lambda capture could result in an invalid instance on the device.
- The type itself could not be copyable or assignable on the device.
- Side effects could happen in at unexpected times, because async kernel run.

So maybe we could write:
```suggestion
Calling this setter on the device would crash if `hostValue` does not form a valid type on the device 
```

Author: I think it would be more pedagogical to explicit what could go wrong. When I read the page before this PR, I didn't get why the capture of the lambda wouldn't be enough.

Author: I tried another formulation based on @JBludau's remark.

The most productive solution we've found in these cases is to allocate the instance in `SharedSpace`, initialize it on the device, and then fill in fields on the host

```c++
// create

> auto deviceInstanceMemory = Kokkos::kokkos_malloc<Kokkos::SharedSpace>(sizeof(Derived)); // allocate on shared space

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
void* deviceInstanceMemory = Kokkos::kokkos_malloc<Kokkos::SharedSpace>(sizeof(Derived)); // allocate on shared space
```

# 14. Kokkos and Virtual Functions

```{warning}
Using virtual functions in parallel regions is not a good idea in general. It often degrades performance, requires specific code for a correct execution on GPU, and is not portable on every backend. We recommend to use a different approach whenever possible.
```

Due to oddities of GPU programming, the use of virtual functions in Kokkos parallel regions can be complicated. This document describes the problems you're likely to face, where they come from, and how to work around them.

Please note that virtual functions can be executed on the device for the following backends:

- Cuda; and
- HIP (with a limitation, as explained at the end).

<!-- Especially, SYCL 2020 [cannot handle virtual functions](https://registry.khronos.org/SYCL/specs/sycl-2020/html/sycl-2020.html#_overview). -->

## The Problem

In GPU programming, you might have run into the bug of calling a host function from the device. A similar thing can happen for subtle reasons in code using virtual functions. Consider the following serial code

```c++
class Base {
  public:
  void Foo() {}

  virtual void Bar() {}
};

class Derived : public Base {
  public:

>   void Bar() override {}

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  public:
  void Bar() override {}
```
for consistency with later code on this page

};

> int main(int argc, char *argv[])

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
int main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
```

![VTable](./figures/VirtualFunctions-VTables.png)

Okay, so now we have Vtables, if a class knows what type it is, it could call the correct function. But how does it know?

Remember that we have one Vtable shared amongst all instances of a type. Each instance, however, has a hidden member called the Vpointer, which the compiler points at construction to the correct Vtable. So a call to a virtual function simply dereferences that pointer, and then indexes into the Vtable to find the precise virtual function called.

![VPointer](./figures/VirtualFunctions-VPointers.png)

Now that we know what the compiler is doing to implement virtual functions, we'll look at why it doesn't work with GPU's.

Credit: the content of this section is adapted from Pablo Arias [here](https://pabloariasal.github.io/2017/06/10/understanding-virtual-tables/).

> ## Then why the straightforward approach doesn't work?

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
## Then why doesn't the straightforward approach work?
```

The reason the straightforward approach described above fails is that when dealing with GPU-compatible classes with virtual functions, there isn't one Vtable, but two. The first holds the host version of the virtual functions, while the second holds the device functions.

![VTableDevice](./figures/VirtualFunctions-VTablesHostDevice.png)

Since we construct the class instance on the host, its Vpointer points to the host Vtable.

![VPointerToHost](./figures/VirtualFunctions-VPointerToHost.png)

We faithfully copied all of the members of the class on the GPU memory, including the Vpointer happily pointing at host functions, which we then call on the device.

## Make it work

> The problem here is that we are constructing the instance on the Host.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The problem here is that we are constructing the instance on the host.
```

> If we were constructing it on the Device, we'd get the correct Vpointer, and thus the correct functions.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If we were constructing it on the device, we'd get the correct Vpointer, and thus the correct functions.
```

Note that this would allow to call virtual functions on the device only, not on the host anymore.

> To that aim, we first allocate memory on the device, then construct on the device using a technique called *placement new*

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Therefore, we first allocate memory on the device, then construct on the device using a technique called `placement new <https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/new#Placement_new> _`.
```

  void Foo() {}

  KOKKOS_FUNCTION
  virtual void Bar() {}
};

class Derived : public Base {
  public:
  KOKKOS_FUNCTION
  void Bar() override {}
};

int main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
  Kokkos::initialize(argc, argv);
  {

  // create
  void* deviceInstanceMemory = Kokkos::kokkos_malloc(sizeof(Derived)); // allocate memory on device
  Kokkos::parallel_for("initialize", 1, KOKKOS_LAMBDA (const int i) {
    new (static_cast<Derived*>(deviceInstanceMemory)) Derived(); // initialize on device
  });
  Base* deviceInstance = static_cast<Derived*>(deviceInstanceMemory); // declare on this memory

  // use
  Kokkos::parallel_for("myKernel", 10, KOKKOS_LAMBDA (const int i) {
      deviceInstance->Bar();
  });

  // cleanup
  Kokkos::parallel_for("destroy", 1, KOKKOS_LAMBDA (const int i) {
    deviceInstance->~Base(); // destroy on device
  });
  Kokkos::fence("wait for destroy");
  Kokkos::kokkos_free(deviceInstanceMemory); // free

  }
  Kokkos::finalize();
}
```

We first use the `KOKKOS_FUNCTION` macro to make the methods callable from a kernel.
When creating the instance, note that we introduce a distinction between the *memory* that the it uses, and the actual instantiated *object*.

> The construct is done on the device, within a single-iteration `parallel_for`, using placement new.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The construction is done on the device, within a single-iteration `parallel_for`, using `placement new <https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/new#Placement_new> _`.
```

> Since the kernel does not have a return type, we use a static cast to associate the object with the memory allocation.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Since the kernel does not have a return type, we use a static cast to associate the object type with the memory allocation.
```

> The destructor must explicitly be called from the device, again with a single-iteration `parallel_for`. Then the memory allocation can be release with `kokkos_free`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
For not `trivially destructable https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/destructor#Trivial_destructor`_ objects the destructor must explicitly be called on the device. After destructing the object in a single-iteration `parallel_for` the memory can be release with `kokkos_free`.
```

This code is extremely ugly, but leads to functional virtual function calls on the device. The Vpointer now points to the device Vtable.
Remember that those virtual functions cannot be called on the host anymore!

![VPointerToDevice](./figures/VirtualFunctions-VPointerToDevice.png)

For a full working example, see [the example in the repo](https://github.com/kokkos/kokkos/blob/master/example/virtual_functions/main.cpp).

## What if I need a setter that works with host values?

> The first problem people run into with this is when they want to initialize some fields based on host data, using a setter which is *not* a virtual function.
> Calling this setter on the device would crash if the host data doesn't form a valid type on the device: especially, if the data type is not copyable on the device (e.g. for a pointer), or if the data instance is invalid on the device.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The first problem people run into with this is when they want to set some fields based on host data. As the object instance resides in device memory, it might not be accessible by the host. But the fields can be set within a `parallel_for` on the device. Nevertheless, this requires that the lambda or functor that sets the fields on the device must have access to the host data.
```

> The most productive solution we've found in these cases is to allocate the instance in `SharedSpace`, initialize it on the device, and then fill in fields on the host

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The most productive solution we've found in these cases is to allocate the object instance in `SharedSpace`, which allows to construct it on the device, and then set fields on the host
```

Reviewer 3: I am skeptical about this one. `Construct` is not very clear to me.

Reviewer 4: I was aiming on: construct = call the constructor

  Kokkos::parallel_for("initialize", 1, KOKKOS_LAMBDA (const int i) {
    new (static_cast<Derived*>(deviceInstanceMemory)) Derived(); // initialize on device
  });
  Base* deviceInstance = static_cast<Derived*>(deviceInstanceMemory); // declare on this memory

  // use
  Kokkos::parallel_for("myKernel", 10, KOKKOS_LAMBDA (const int i) {
      deviceInstance->Bar();
  });

  // cleanup
  Kokkos::parallel_for("destroy", 1, KOKKOS_LAMBDA (const int i) {
    deviceInstance->~Base(); // destroy on device
  });
  Kokkos::fence("wait for destroy");
  Kokkos::kokkos_free(deviceInstanceMemory); // free

  }
  Kokkos::finalize();
}
```

We first use the `KOKKOS_FUNCTION` macro to make the methods callable from a kernel.
When creating the instance, note that we introduce a distinction between the *memory* that it uses, and the actual instantiated *object*.
The object instance is constructed on the device, within a single-iteration `parallel_for`, using [placement new](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/new#Placement_new).
Since the kernel does not have a return type, we use a static cast to associate the object type with the memory allocation.

> For not [trivially destructable](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/destructor#Trivial_destructor) objects the destructor must explicitly be called on the device.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For not [trivially destructible](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/destructor#Trivial_destructor) objects the destructor must explicitly be called on the device.
```

# 14. Kokkos and Virtual Functions

```{warning}
Using virtual functions in parallel regions is not a good idea in general. It often degrades performance, it requires specific code for a correct execution on GPU, and it is not portable on every backend. We recommend to use a different approach whenever possible.
```

Due to oddities of GPU programming, the use of virtual functions in Kokkos parallel regions can be complicated. This document describes the problems you're likely to face, where they come from, and how to work around them.

Please note that virtual functions can be executed on device for the following backends:

> - Cuda; and
> - HIP.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Cuda
- HIP
```

## The Problem

In GPU programming, you might have run into the bug of calling a host function from the device. A similar thing can happen for subtle reasons in code using virtual functions. Consider the following code (using Cuda instructions as an example)

```c++
class Derived : public Base {
  // fields

  public:
  KOKKOS_FUNCTION virtual void Bar(){
    // all of physics
  } 
};

Base* hostInstance = new Derived();
Base* deviceInstance;
cudaMalloc((void**)&deviceInstance, sizeof(Derived));

> cudaMemcpy(deviceInstance, hostInstance, sizeof(Derived), cudaMemcpyHostToDevice);

Author: More about this in the comment after.

![VTable](./figures/VirtualFunctions-VTables.png)

Okay, so now we have Vtables, if a class knows what type it is, it could call the correct function. But how does it know?

Remember that we have one Vtable shared amongst all instances of a type. Each instance, however, has a hidden member called the Vpointer, which the compiler points at construction to the correct Vtable. So a call to a virtual function simply dereferences that pointer, and then indexes into the Vtable to find the precise virtual function called.

![VPointer](./figures/VirtualFunctions-VPointers.png)

Now that we know what the compiler is doing to implement virtual functions, we'll look at why it doesn't work with GPU's.

Credit: the content of this section is adapted from Pablo Arias [here](https://pabloariasal.github.io/2017/06/10/understanding-virtual-tables/).

## Then why doesn't my code work?

> The reason the intro code might break is that when dealing with GPU-compatible classes with virtual functions, there isn't one Vtable, but two. The first holds the host version of the virtual functions, while the second holds the device functions. 

Author: This is not part of this PR.

![VTableDevice](./figures/VirtualFunctions-VTablesHostDevice.png)

Since we construct the class instance on the host, so it's Vpointer points to the host Vtable.

![VPointerToHost](./figures/VirtualFunctions-VPointerToHost.png)

Our `cudaMemcpy()` faithfully copied all of the members of the class, including the Vpointer merrily pointing at host functions, which we then call on the device. 

## How to fix this

The problem here is that we are constructing the class on the Host. If we were constructing on the Device, we'd get the correct Vpointer, and thus the correct functions (but only for calls on the device). We want to move from

```c++
Base* hostInstance = new Derived(); // allocate and initialize on host
Base* deviceInstance; // declare
cudaMalloc((void**)&deviceInstance, sizeof(Derived)); // alocate on device
cudaMemcpy(deviceInstance, hostInstance, sizeof(Derived), cudaMemcpyHostToDevice); // initialize on device by copy

Kokkos::parallel_for("DeviceKernel", SomeCudaPolicy, KOKKOS_LAMBDA (const int i) {
  // use on device
});
```

to one where we construct on the device using a technique called *placement new*

```c++
Base* deviceInstance; // declare

> cudaMalloc((void**)&deviceInstance, sizeof(Derived)); // alocate on device

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
cudaMalloc((void**)&deviceInstance, sizeof(Derived)); // allocate on device
```

## Make it portable

We can get rid of the call to `cudaMalloc()` and make the previous code portable

```cpp
auto deviceInstanceMemory = Kokkos::kokkos_malloc(sizeof(Derived)); // allocate memory on device
Kokkos::parallel_for("Initialize", 1, KOKKOS_LAMBDA (const int i) {
  new (static_cast<Derived*>(deviceInstanceMemory)) Derived(); // initialize on device
});
Kokkos::fence("Wait for initialize");
Base* deviceInstance = static_cast<Derived*>(deviceInstanceMemory); // declare on this memory

Kokkos::parallel_for("DeviceKernel", SomeCudaPolicy, KOKKOS_LAMBDA (const int i) {
  // use on device
});
Kokkos::fence();

Kokkos::parallel_for("Destroy", 1, KOKKOS_LAMBDA (const int i) {
  deviceInstance->~Base(); // destroy on device
});
Kokkos::fence("Wait for destroy");
Kokkos::kokkos_free(deviceInstanceMemory); // free
```

We replaced `cudaMalloc()` by `Kokkos::kokkos_malloc()` and introduced a distinction between the memory that the instance uses, and the actual instance object.
Since the kernel does not have a return type, we use a static cast to associate the later to the former.
Then, the object is destroyed, and its memory freed.

> 

Reviewer 4: I guess if we put the kokkos version we should do it all around and get rid of the cuda version

Author: I'm not sure to get what you mean.

Reviewer 4: I meant update all the code sections to use kokkos semantics and get rid of the cuda code.

Author: Ah, yes indeed.

Author: Done in the latest commits.

deviceInstance->setAField(someHostValue); // set on host
```

This is the solution that the code teams we have talked to have said is the most productive way to solve the problem. Nevertheless, it should be kept in mind, that this restricts virtual function calls to the device.
In the case presented above, `setAField()` is not a virtual function.

## But what if I do not really need the V-Tables on the device side?

Consider the following example which calls the virtual function `Bar()` on the device from a pointer of derived class type.
One might think this should work because no V-Table lookup on the device is necessary.

```c++
#include <Kokkos_Core.hpp>

struct Base
{
  KOKKOS_DEFAULTED_FUNCTION
  virtual ~Base() = default;

  KOKKOS_FUNCTION
  virtual void Bar() const = 0;
};

struct Derived : public Base
{
  KOKKOS_FUNCTION
  void Bar() const override
  { Kokkos::printf("Hello from Derived\n"); }

  void apply(){
    Kokkos::parallel_for("myLoop", 10,
      KOKKOS_CLASS_LAMBDA (const size_t i) { this->Bar(); }
    );
  }
};

int main (int argc, char *argv[])
{
  Kokkos::ScopeGuard kokkos(argc, argv);
  auto derivedPtr = std::make_shared<Derived>();
  derivedPtr->apply();

>   Kokkos::fence();

Reviewer 4: why use the `ScopeGuard` here?

Author: `ScopeGuard` should be preferred over `initialize`/`finalize` as it ensures that `finalize` is called no matter what (RAII).

Reviewer 4: hmm AFAIK we try to avoid `ScopeGuard` in the examples, both in the tutorials as well as in the documentation. I do agree, that it would not make much of a difference in this example, but I would favor consistency

Author: I think it's a good opportunity to start using it more.

## What if I need a setter that works with host values?

The first problem people run into with this is when they want to initialize some fields based on host data, using a setter which is *not* a virtual function.

> Calling this setter on the device would crash if the host data doesn't form a valid type on the device: especially, if the data type is not copyable on the device (e.g. for a pointer), or if the data instance is invalid on the device.

Reviewer 4: I would prefer to leave the part post :. I think it is just confusing or a repetition. 
A pointer is a valid type on device and if it points into the right memory space, the setter is perfectly valid. Even assigning a pointer to host memory on the device is valid as the violation will only occur if the pointer is read/written to.

If you want to specify anything here, I would suggest spelling out the abstract requirements. If you want an example, you could refer to the requirements and explain what is violated
